\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename bdsim.info
@settitle BDSIM beta User's Manual
@c This date is automagically updated when you save this file:
@set lastupdate October 12, 2005
@c %**end of header

@setchapternewpage off

@copying

Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Royal Holloway.


@end copying


@titlepage
@title BDSIM User's Manual v0.1
@author Ilya Agapov
@author last updated @value{lastupdate}
@end titlepage
@setcontentsaftertitlepage

@contents



@node Top, Intro, (dir), (dir)
@top BDSIM beta User's Manual


This file is updated automatically from @file{manual.texi}, which was
last updated on @value{lastupdate}.


@insertcopying

@menu
* Intro::                       
* Installation::                
* Lattice::      
* Visualization::                        
* Physics::                     
* Architecture::                
* Geometry::                    
* Fields::     
* Bunches::
* Authors::                     
* References::                  
@end menu


@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Intro, Installation, Top, Top
@chapter About BDSIM

BDSIM is a Geant4 extension toolkit for simulation of particle
transport in accelerator beamlines.It provides a collection of classes representing typical
accelerator components, a collection of physics processes for fast tracking, procedure of ``on the fly'' geometry 
construction,  and interface to ROOT analysis. 
 

@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Installation, Lattice,Intro, Top
@chapter Obtaining, Installing and Running


@code{BDSIM} can be downloaded at http://flc.pp.rhul.ac.uk/bdsim.html.
Alternatively, a development version is accessible under cvs.pp.rhul.ac.uk. 
Download the tarball and extract the source code. Make sure Geant4 is installed and appropriate environment
variables defined. Then go through the configuration procedure 
by running the @code{./configure} script.

@code{./configure}


It will create a Makefile from template defined in Makefile.in. Then start the compilation by typing

@code{./make}

If the compilation is successful @code{bdsim} executable should be created in the current directory of in the
@code{$G4WORKDIR} directory in case this variable is defined. Next, set up the LD_LIBRARY_PATH variable to
point to the ./parser directory and to the directory where libbdsim.so is.


@code{BDSIM} is invoked by the command
@code{bdsim} @option{options}

where the options are

@example
--file=<filename>   : specify the lattice file
--output=<fmt>      : output format (root|ascii), default ascii
--outfile=<file>    : output file name. Will be appended with _N
                      where N = 0, 1, 2, 3... etc.
--vis_mac=<file>    : file with the visualization macro script, default vis.mac
--help              : display this message
--verbose           : display general parameters before run
--verbose_event     : display information for every event
--verbose_step=N    : display tracking information after each step
--verbose_event_num : display tracking information for event number N
--batch             : batch mode - no graphics
@end example



@code{BDSIM} can be also invoked by the @code{bdsimrun} shell script which handles batch job
 support and opther features.


To run bdsim one has to define the beamline geometry first in a file which is then 
passes to bdsim via the @code{--file} command line option. The next section describes how to do it. 

@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Lattice,Visualization,Installation,Top
@chapter Lattice description

@menu
* program-structure::
* elements::
* run-control::                       
@end menu

The beamline, beam properties and physics processes are specified in the input file written in the 
GMAD language. @footnote{Note: In the next releases an xml-based description will be also available}
This language is a variation of the MAD language and is described in this section.

@node program-structure
@section Program structure


A GMAD consists of a sequence of element definitions and control commands.
For example, tracking a 1 Gev electron beam through a FODO cell will require file like :

@example

@code{qf: quadrupole, l=0.5, k1=0.1};
@code{qd: quadrupole, l=0.5, k1=-0.1};
@code{d: drift, l=0.5};
@code{fodo : line=(qf,d,qd,d)};
@code{use,period=fodo,range=#s/#e};
@code{beam, particle=electron,energy=1};

@end example

The parser is case sensitive. However, for convenience of porting lattice 
descriptions from MAD the keywords can be both lower and upper case.
The GMAD language is discussed in more detail in this section.

@node elements
@section Physical elements and Entities

@menu
* coordinate-system::
* units::
* marker::                       
@end menu


GMAD implements almost all standard MAD elements, but also allows to define arbitrary geometric entities and 
magnetic field configurations.
The syntax of a physical element declaration is

@code{element : element_type, attributes;}

for example

@code{qd : quadrupole, l = 0.1, k1 = 0.01;}

@code{element_type} can be of basic type or inherited. Allowed basic types are

@itemize
@item marker
@item drift
@item sbend
@item rbend
@item quadrupole
@item sextupole
@item octupole
@item multipole
@end itemize


An already defined element can be used as a new element type. Its attributes are
then inherited. 

@node coordinate-system
@subsection Coordinate system

@node units
@subsection Units

In GMAD the SI units are used. 

@table @code
@item Length  	
 [m] (metres)
@item angle 
 [rad] (radians)
@item quadrupole coefficient 
 [m**(-2)]
@item multipole coefficient
 2n poles 	[m**(-n)]
@item electric voltage 	
 [MV] (Megavolts)
@item electric field strength 	
 [MV/m]
@item particle energy 	
 [GeV]
@item particle mass 	
 [eV/c**2]
@item particle momentum 
 [eV/c]
@item beam current 	
 [A] (Amperes)
@item particle charge 	
 [e] (elementary charges)
@item emittances 	
 [pi m mrad]
@end table 

There are some predefined numerical values

@table @code
@item pi 
 3.14159265358979
@item me 
 electron rest mass
@item mp 
 proton rest mass
@item KeV 
 10^3 (in [eV] units) 
@item MeV 
 10^6 (in [eV] units) 
@item GeV 
 10^9 (in [eV] units)
@item TeV 
 10^12 
@end table

for example, instead of one can write either 100 or 0.1 * KeV when energy constants are concerned.

@node marker
@subsection marker

@code{marker} has no effect but allows one to identify a position in the beam line.
It has no attributes.

Example:

@code{m1 : marker;}


@subsection drift

@code{drift} defines a straight drift space.
Attributes:
@itemize 
@item @code{l} - length [m] (default 0)
@end itemize

Example :

@code{d13 : drift, l=0.5;}


@subsection rbend

@code{rbend} defines a rectangulat bending magnet.
Attributes:
@itemize 
@item @code{l} - length [m] (default 0)
@item @code{angle} - bending angle [rad] (default 0)
@item @code{B} - magnetic field [T] 
@end itemize

when @code{B} is set, this defines a magnet with appropriate field strength and @code{angle}
is not taken into account. Otherwise, @code{B} that corresponds to bending angle @code{angle} for a particle in use 
(defined by the @code{beam} command, with appropriate energy and rest mass) is calculated and used in the simulations.

Example :

@code{rb1 : rbend, l=0.5, angle = 0.01;}

@subsection sbend

@code{sbend} defines a sector bending magnet.
Attributes:
@itemize 
@item @code{l} - length [m] (default 0)
@item @code{angle} - bending angle [rad] (default 0)
@item @code{B} - magnetic field [T] 
@end itemize

Example :

The meaning of @code{B} and @code{angle} is the same as for @code{rbend}.

@code{rb1 : rbend, l=0.5, angle = 0.01;}

@subsection quadrupole

@code{quadrupole} defines a quadrupole.
Attributes:
@itemize 
@item @code{l} - length [m] (default 0)
@item @code{k1} - normal quadrupole coefficient
k1 = (1/B rho ) (dBy  / dx) [m^-2]
Positive @code{k1} means horisontal focusing of positively charged particles. (default 0)
@item ks1 - skew quadrupole coefficient
ks1 =  (1/B rho ) (dBy  / dx) [m^-2]
where (x,y) is now a coordinate system rotated by 45 degrees around s with respect to the normal one.(default 0). 
@item @code{tilt} [rad] - roll angle about the longitudinal axis, clockwise.
@end itemize

Example :

@code{qf : quadrupole, l=0.5 , k1 = 0.5 , tilt = 0.01;}

@subsection sextupole

@code{sextupole} defines a sextupole.
Attributes:
@itemize 
@item @code{l} - length [m] (default 0)
@item @code{k2} - normal sextupole coefficient
k2 = (1/B rho ) (d^2 By  / dx^2) [m^-3]
Positive @code{k1} means horisontal focusing of positively charged particles. (default 0)
@item ks1 - skew sextupole coefficient
ks2 =  (1/B rho ) (d^2 By  / dx^2) [m^-3]
where (x,y) is now a coordinate system rotated by 30 degrees around s with respect to the normal one.(default 0). 
@item @code{tilt} [rad] - roll angle about the longitudinal axis, clockwise.
@end itemize

Example :

@code{sf : sextupole, l=0.5 , k2 = 0.5 , tilt = 0.01;}

@subsection octupole

@subsection multipole

@subsection collimator

@code{collimator} defines a collimator

Attributes:
@itemize 
@item @code{l} - length [m] (default 0)
@item @code{aperture} - aperture , defined by the @code{aperture} element
@item @code{material} - material , defined by @code{material}
@end itemize

Example : 

@code{coll : collimator,l=1, aperture=<aperture>, material=<material>}

@subsection solenoid
 
@subsection transform3d

An arbitrary 3-dimensional transformation of the coordinate system is done by
placing a @code{transform3d} element in the beamline. The syntax is

@itemize
@item @code{x} = @code{<x offset>}
@item @code{y} = @code{<y offset>}
@item @code{z} = @code{<z offset>}
@item @code{phi} = @code{<phi Euler angle>}
@item @code{theta} = @code{<theta Euler angle>}
@item @code{psi} = @code{<psi Euler angle>}
@end itemize

Example: 

@code{<name> : transform3d, psi=pi/2}


@subsection element

All the elements are in principle examples of a general type @code{element} 
which can represent an arbitrary geometric 
entity with arbitrary E and B field maps. Its attributes are

@itemize
@item @code{geometry} = @code{<geometry_description>}
@item @code{bmap} = @code{<bmap_description> }
@item @code{emap} = @code{<emap_description>}
@end itemize


Descriptions are of the form @code{format:filename}, where @code{filename} is the path to the 
file with the geometry description and @code{format} defines the geometry description format.
The possible formats are given in @ref{Geometry}.


Example :

@code{qq : element, geometry = plain:qq.geom, bmap = plain:qq.bmap;}

@code{<bmap>} and @code{<emap>} 
are definitions of E and B field maps according to (field maps).

@subsection line

elements are grouped into sequences by the @code{line} command.

@code{@var{line_name} : line=(@var{element1},@var{element2},...);}

@var{element}@code{n} can be any element or another line.

Example : 

A sequence of three FODO cells can be defines as

@example

@code{qf: quadrupole, l=0.5, k1=0.1};
@code{qd: quadrupole, l=0.5, k1=-0.1};
@code{d: drift, l=0.5};
@code{fodo : line=(qf,d,qd,d)};
@code{beamline : line@{fodo,fodo,fodo@};}

@end example

@subsection aperture

@subsection material

@code{<material> : material,Z=,A=,density=,temperature= }

Attributes
@itemize
@item @code{Z} - atomic number
@item @code{A} - mass number
@item @code{density} - [kg/m]
@item @code{temperature} [K]
@end itemize

@subsection pipe

the beam pipe parameters are used for particle tracking inside elements when the use geometry is
not defined. The beam pipe radius is assigned by the @code{pipe} command 

@code{pipe, range=<range>, range=, r=, thickness=, material=<material>};

Attributes
@itemize
@item @code{range} - element range to assign the radius for
@item @code{r} - radius [m]
@item @code{thickness} - thickness [m]
@item @code{material} - beam pipe material
@end itemize

Example :

Supposing we want to define a copper beam pipe for ...  

@example
@code{iron : material, Z=1,A=1,density=100, temperature=;}
@code{copper : material,Z=,A=,density=,temperature=;;}

@code{fodo : line=(qf,d,qd,d);}
@code{pipe, range=qf/qd, r=0.2, thickness = 0.1,material=copper; }
@code{pipe, range=d[2], r=0.1, thickness = 0.05,material=iron; }

@end example

@subsection laser

@code{laser} defines a drift section with a laser beam inside.

@code{<laser_name>: laser, position = @{<x>,<y>,<z>@},direction=@{ <dx>, <dy>, <dz>  @}
wavelen=<val>, spotsize=<val>, intensity=<val>;}

Attributes
@itemize
@item @code{l} - length of the drift section
@item @code{position} - position of an arbitrary point on the beam axis relative to the center of the
                        drift section
@item @code{direction} - vector pointing in the beam direction
@item @code{wavelen} - laser wave length [m]
@item @code{spotsize} - spot size (sigma)[m]
@item @code{intensity} -[W]
@end itemize

the laser is considered to be the intersection of the laser beaam with the volume of the drift section.

@subsection gas

@code{gas} command is used to introduce gas into the beam pipe. 
@footnote{in realistic situations the gas profile can vary in transverse dimensions.
This is not taken into account for a)technical reasons b)one does not know the profile anyway}

@code{gas, period=, components=@{c1,c2,...@},parts=@{p1,p2,...@} };

where
@itemize
@item @code{c1,c2,...} - gas components names 
@item @code{p1,p2,...} - parts (100%=1). They need not sum up to 1.
@end itemize 

the gas componens are defined by

@code{c1 : gas, name=<name>, A=<A>, Z=<Z>, profile=<profile_name>};

where
@itemize
@item @code{<Z>} - atomic number
@item @code{<A>} - mass number
@item @code{<profile_name>} - name of gas profile definition 
@end itemize 

the gas profile is defined as 

@code{<profile_name> : gas_profile = (<element>:<pressure>, <element>:<pressure>) };

where
@itemize
@item @code{<element>} - name of the beamline component
@item @code{<pressure>} - gas pressure (bar)
@end itemize 


The gas pressure is then interpolated between the points where it is defined.
Issuing multiple @code{gas} commands acts additively.

Example :

To introduce the gas into a fodo cell

@example

@code{...element definitions...}

@code{fodo : line=(qf,d,qd,d);}

@code{co2 : gas, name="c02", Z=22,A=44,profile=co2profile;}
@code{h20 : gas, name="h2", Z=1,A=1,profile=co2profile;}

@code{c02profile : gas_profile = (qd:0.01, qf:0.02*nbar,d:0.03*nbar); }
@code{h20profile : gas_profile = (qd:0.04, qf:0.01*nbar,d:0.03*nbar); }

@code{gas, period=fodo,components= @{ c02,h20@},parts=@{0.7,0.8@}; }


@end example 

@node run-control
@section Run control and output

The execution control is performed in the GMAD input file through @code{option} and @code{beam}
commands. How the results are recorded is controlledby the @code{sample} command.
When the visualization is turned on, it is however controlled through command prompt
and has different syntax (Geant4 syntax). 

@subsection  @code{option}


@code{option, <name>=value,...};

the available options are options are

@example

nperfile
beampipeRadius
boxSize
tunnelRadius
beampipeThickness
deltaChord
deltaIntersection
chordStepMinimum
lengthSafety
turnInteractions
thresholdCutCharged
thresholdCutPhotons
useEMHadronic
storeTrajectory
stopTracks

@end example

For a more detailed description of how the option influence the tracking see @ref{Physics}


Example : 





@subsection @code{beam}

@code{beam, particle=electron,energy=100, momentum=1,1,1;}

@subsection @code{sample}

To record the tracking results one uses the @code{sample} command:

@code{sample, range=<range>,particle=<particle>,values=@{value1,value2,...@}}

the parameters are

@itemize
@item @code{element}
@item @code{range}
@item @code{particle} - particle to record. One @code{sample} command activates sampling only for one 
                        particle type
@item @code{value} 
   @itemize    
   @item @code{x} - horizontal
   @item @code{px} - horizontal momentum
   @item @code{xx} - 
   @item @code{y}
   @item @code{py}
   @item @code{E} - energy
   @item @code{id} - track id. This enables later trajectory analysis.  
   @end itemize
@end itemize


Example :
@example
@code{sample, element=qd,particle=electron, values=@{x,px,y,py,e,id @}; }
@code{sample, range=qd/qf:0.1*m,particle=photon, values=@{x,px,y,py,e,id @}; }
@end example


@subsection @code{use}

@code{use} command selects the beam line for study

@code{use, period=,range=}

@subsection visualization control

when bdsim is invoked in interactive mode, the run is controlled by the Geant4 shell. Some examples 

@code{/run/beamOn 100} runs the simulation with 100 particles


To display help menu

@code{/help};

For more details see @ref{Geant}.

@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Visualization,Physics,Lattice,Top
@chapter Visualization

@include visualization.texi

@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Physics,Architecture,Visualization,Top
@chapter Physics

@section Transportation 

@subsection Tracking of charged particles in EM fields of low multipole order

@subsection Tracking of charged particles in arbitrary EM fileds

@subsection Neutron transport

not implemented yet

@section Shower parametrization

@section Synchrotron Radiation

@section Bremsstrahlung

@section Compton

@section Gas scattering

@section Tuning the tracking procedure

@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Architecture,Geometry,Physics,Top
@chapter Implementation Notes

BDSIM uses Geant4 libraries and execution control mechanism. 


@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Geometry,Fields,Architecture,Top
@appendix Geometry description formats

The element with user-defined physical geometry is defined by

@code{<element_name> : element, geometry=format:filename, attributes}

for example,

@code{colli : element, geometry="gmad:colli.geo"}


@section @code{gmad} format

@code{gmad} is a simple format used as G4geometry wrapper. It can be used for specifying more or less
simple geometries like collimators. Available shapes are:

@example 
Box @{
x0=x_origin,
y0=y_origin,
z0=z_origin,
x=xsize,
y=ysize,
z=zsize,
material=MaterialName,
temperature=T
@}
@end example


@example 
Tubs @{
x0=x_origin,
y0=y_origin,
z0=z_origin,
x=xsize,
y=ysize,
z=zsize,
material=MaterialName,
temperature=T
@}
@end example

For example

@example

Cons @{
x0=0,
y0=0,
z0=0,
rmin1=5
rmax1=500
rmin2=5
rmax2=500
z=250
material="Graphite",
phi0=0,
dphi=360,
temperature=1
@}

@end example


A file can contain several objects which will be placed consequently into the volume, A user has to make
sure that there is no overlap between them.


@section @code{mokka}

@include mokka.texi

@section @code{gdml}
GDML is a XML schema for dtector description.
GDML will be supported as an external format starting from next release.


@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Fields,Bunches,Geometry,Top
@appendix Field description formats

The element with user-defined physical geometry is defined by command 

@code{<element_name> : element, geometry=format:filename, attributes}

for example,

@code{ colli : element, geometry=plain:colli.geom}

@node Bunches, Authors, Fields, Top
@appendix Bunch description formats

@code{GUINEAPIG_BUNCH}


@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node Authors, References, Bunches, Top
@chapter Authors 


@multitable @columnfractions .25 .35 .4
@item Name @tab Email 
@item Ilya Agapov
@tab @email{agapov@@pp.rhul.ac.uk}
@item Grahame Blair
@tab @email{blair@@pp.rhul.ac.uk}
@item John Carter 
@tab @email{carter@@pp.rhul.ac.uk}
@c @item Olivier Dadoun
@c @tab @email{dadoun@@lal.in2p3.fr}
@c @tab Visualization
@end multitable


@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc
@c
@c cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc

@node References, , Authors, Top
@chapter References

@enumerate

@anchor{Blair}
@item
G. Blair, Simulation of the CLIC Beam Delivery System Using BDSIM, CLIC Note 509

@anchor{Root}
@item 
Root User's Guide, @uref{http://root.cern.ch/root/doc/RootDoc.html}

@anchor{Geant}
@item 
Geant4 User's Guide, @uref{http://wwwasd.web.cern.ch/wwwasd/geant4/G4UsersDocuments/Overview/html/index.html}

@anchor{MAD}
@item 
MAD-X User's Guide, @uref{http://mad.home.cern.ch/mad/uguide.html}

@anchor{NLC}
@item 
NLC Zero-order design report 

@end enumerate

@bye
@c  LocalWords:  dir texi lastupdate uref http www org html helpgnu ifinfo ftp
@c  LocalWords:  dvi hurd toc gvc URL GTK XmHTML xs nl ripley NT com gettext Qt
@c  LocalWords:  GUI libstdc Docbook SGML libc sed STL Gforth GNUstep TCSH Perl
@c  LocalWords:  Ghostscript PIC GCC Texinfo grep dc bc ethernet GDB IP CIFS CU
@c  LocalWords:  SMB SVGA Khoros Automake OpenStep diff roff Smail tron veritas
@c  LocalWords:  cxref ctrace API LilyPond xephem labanotation LessTif outliner
@c  LocalWords:  Hypercard morphing SeeMe ICQ Diffie Helman RSA SSLv TLSv GPL
@c  LocalWords:  OpenBIOS BIOS LILO dbase dbased Harbour harbour WYSIWYG ISBN
@c  LocalWords:  TruePrint Baecker siff sif cs arizona edu TR ps mt sulaco MP
@c  LocalWords:  RTSP MPEG jasonw ariel ucs unimelb AU stutz dsl TCL Javascript
@c  LocalWords:  Rexx GnuGo jhall isd Biomorph regexp eval gd gnuorg
